In this video we'll introduce virtual volumes and virtual games is really the next generation of Wiis
for storage and we've already spent some time learning learning about VM as data stores and manifest
data stores and things like that and virtual Sam virtual items are kind of the next step in the evolution
of storage.
But the other nice thing about them is they support a lot of the existing storage architecture that
already exists.
So for example virtual volumes support common storage networks like Fiber Channel and I scuzzy and fast.
But the biggest difference is that our virtual machine objects are actually exposed to the storage array
right.
So let's kind of think about the way that things are right now.
Right.
Without virtual volumes.
What we've got are data stores.
Right.
We've got these data stores.
And here's our data store and our data stores formatted with VM fast.
So here's a VM EF-S data store.
Well when you take a data store and you format it with VM fast you're creating a file system on that
data store that the storage array does not understand that the storage array is not able to dig inside
of a VM fast data store and view individual virtual machine objects.
And that's the biggest difference between virtual volumes and the traditional long and VM FS architecture
is that we can manage individual virtual machine objects at the storage array level.
This makes things like cloning and snapshots very different than they've traditionally been with a VM
a fast data store.
So with a traditional data store architecture what we have are logical unit numbers.
We're going to have these Lunds.
And on those lines we're going to create VM status stores.
So here we see two lines and on each line we've created a data store and then we can store all of our
virtual machine objects within those data stores and what the lawn has typically provided is basically
a container where all of those virtual machine files will be head rephrase.
And what the line has typically provided is a storage container where all of those virtual machine files
will be located.
Now with the vaules the concept of a lawn and data store go away.
So it evolves what we're going to do is we're going to have a new object called a storage container
and all our vehicles are virtual volumes are going to be stored in this storage container and the storage
container doesn't have the traditional limitations of a LUN.
The only restriction is the maximum actual physical storage capacity of the array.
So do data stores still exist.
Well technically yes they do but data store is purely there for functions like high availability data
stores and things like that.
What really is going on now is we've got this one big storage container on the storage array and the
storage array has visibility to all of the individual virtual machine objects that are contained within
that storage container.
So our storage container is where all of our virtual volumes exist.
And as a virtual machine needs to send storage commands to its virtual disks for example we have something
called the protocol endpoint and basically handles all the traffic.
So our host doesn't really care about the storage container it doesn't care how big or small it is it
doesn't care how many of them there are
there's going to simply be this protocol endpoint that will serve as an interface to the storage container.
And so one my virtual machine issues a scuzzy command the scuzzy command just like always will flow
out of the virtual scuzzy controller of the VM and the ESX I host the hypervisor will send it to the
appropriate storage adapter through the protocol endpoint and the data bill will be written to the individual
virtual volume.
So that's kind of some of the underlying mechanisms that are involved with virtual lives.
Now from the perspective of what benefits does it provide Let's say that you need to clone a virtual
machine.
Right so you have this virtual machine and the V-Vocal for the virtual machine is here and we need to
clone it well rather than handling the cloning operation at the ESX host level.
We can handle it at the storage container level and at the storage array because the storage array can
see all of these individual vehicles.
And that's a much more efficient.
Let's think about a cloning operation where the host is handling it well what's going to happen in that
scenario.
Is all of this virtual machines data is going to have to get pulled into the host.
And then a copy of it has to all get pushed back to the storage for it.
That's the way that cloning has traditionally been performed.
What if instead of this traditional method if we wanted to perform a cloning operation maybe V Center
could simply send a command to the storage array and tell the storage array hey this virtual volume
needs to be cloned.
This virtual line needs to be snapshot and then the storage array itself handles that workload without
having to transmit all of that data over the storage network.
Right.
We don't need that.
We can offload those tasks to the storage array.
So there are huge efficiencies with virtual volumes and that's why it's kind of the push towards the
next generation of storage.
Now these are not going to displace traditional VMA has data stores any time within the next couple
of years but eventually the percentage of virtual volumes back storage devices will continue to grow.